# UWaterloo_Group05
Foundations of Data Science assignment
This is a study of Weather Data and Traffic Accidents and their relationship, in the city of Kitchener, Ontario over five years from 2016 to 2021 (inclusive).
Our data sources for this analysis are: a MSC GeoMet - GeoMet-OGC-API using Meteorological Service of Canada (MSC) and Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC) data; and a Traffic Collisions for the city of Kitchener data set from the city of Waterloo. https://api.weather.gc.ca/openapi#/climate-daily/getClimate-dailyFeatures &  https://data.waterloo.ca/datasets/75fa68b17e5b421d9d881f987c2d43fc_0/api
https://services1.arcgis.com/qAo1OsXi67t7XgmS/arcgis/rest/services/Traffic_Collisions/FeatureServer/0/query?where=ACCIDENT_YEAR=2018&outFields=*&outSR=4326&f=json respectively.
The five year period was shifted back to 2016 as the Traffic Collision Open Dataset lacked any entries after May of 2022. The five year period encompasses the first two years of the global pandemic, thus we see that when looking at collisions year over year, the number of accidents is significantly lower over the last two years (2020 & 2021). Thus we ignored year over year explorations for trends over time - to avoid the massive skew to fewer accidents (which we attribute to lower traffic volumes during the pandemic conditions, and the increased trend of home-working in the subsequent year). 
At first glance, by far the greatest number of accidents occur during clear weather conditions, though this can accounted for by calculating that the hourly weather was reported as clear predominantly (75.4% of all the timestamps). The distribution of the various inclement weather conditions (snow, rain, fog, haze, etc) favours winter weather conditions with 15.9 % of the total weather hours report snow or freezing conditions (15.9% out of the 24.6% of all types of non-clear weather or 64.6% of inclement weather featuring some form of snow or freezing condition(s)). 
The plot of accidents by month distrubuted between the various reported weather conditions shows that the increased number of accidents through the winter months can ( at least partially) be attributed towards bad winter weather. A distribution of accidents in clear road conditions does show an increased number of accidents between May and November, whether due to more driving during these months or more clear weather. 
An hourly distribution of the number of accidents shows that the worst hours of the day for accidents are 8 and 9 am, and the post-work rush hours show an increased rate of accident as well. The hours from 11pm to 5 am show a far reduced number of accidents - likely attributable to the lower traffic volumes overnight. 
When examining the percentage of weather conditions in the overnight hours we see an increased chance of poor weather conditions reported between midnight and 6 am (when the percentage of good weather begins to improve) when the sun is down and the hours are the coldest.
Finally a plot of the percentage of bad weather hours & percentage of accidents in bad weather shows a larger increase in the percentage of accidents than the percentage of bad weather would indicate. This demonstrates that poor weather conditions have a positive correlation (presumptively causal - though not demonstrably so) with accidents.
